New Test Waiters (#581)
emberjs/rfcs: text/0000-new-test-waiters.md

- Start Date: 2020-01-14
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Ember Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

> Test waiters have been around in Ember in one form or another since version 1.2.0, and provide a way for developers to signal to the testing framework system that async operations are currently active, when to keep waiting, and when those async operations have completed. This allows the active test to wait during the test in a deterministic fashion, and only proceed once the active async is completed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test waiters have been around in Ember in one form or another since version 1.2.0, and provide a way for developers to signal to the testing framework system that async operations are currently active, when to keep waiting, and when those async operations have completed. This allows the active test to wait during the test in a deterministic fashion, and only proceed once the active async is completed.
```

The current test waiters implementation has a simple but confusing API, and the test waiters themselves lack some key features. This RFC proposes replacing them with a new test waiters system: [ember-test-waiters](https://github.com/rwjblue/ember-test-waiters).

# Motivation

Recently, an updated replacement for the original test waiters API was created. This new library, ember-test-waiters, seeks to provide an easy-to-use API that can be used to interleave unmanaged async behaviors with Ember’s test framework. Using a test waiter can help mark begin and end points for your async operations, allowing the test to deterministically pause during execution.

The new system will provide a few benefits:

> 1. A new API that's _explicit_ and _straightforward_

Reviewer: FWIW, "straightforward" is a bit subjective 😄, I'd suggest a smallish tweak to:

```suggestion
1. A new API that removes the existing footguns (e.g. "Do I return `false` or `true` if I want to continue waiting?!?")
```

1. A more robust way to gather debugging information for the test waiter
1. Default test waiters with the ability to author your own, more complex test waiters

# Detailed design

> Ember’s test framework has an internal concept of settledness, that is used by all of its internal helpers. Settledness can be defined as **_all known active async operations have completed, and there’s no outstanding work to be done_**. This is codified in the [settled](https://github.com/emberjs/ember-test-helpers/blob/master/addon-test-support/@ember/test-helpers/settled.ts#L158) helper.

Reviewer: > This is codified in the [settled](https://github.com/emberjs/ember-test-helpers/blob/master/addon-test-support/@ember/test-helpers/settled.ts#L158) helper

Can you tweak this to point to https://github.com/emberjs/ember-test-helpers/blob/master/API.md#settled?

The settled helper, as noted, wires itself up to known asynchronous behaviors. Those include whether there

- is an active runloop (more on the runloop)
- are any pending timers within the runloop (run.later, run.debounce, run.throttle)
- are any pending test waiters (more on waiters later!)

> - are any pending AJAX requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- are any pending `jQuery.ajax` requests
```

During the development of the test isolation validation feature, we discovered that most asynchronous operations used in the settled check provided good debug information that could be provided to the end user, with the exception of the existing test waiters. Those waiters only provided rudimentary information that could be exposed, specifically whether there were any active test waiters pending, but nothing more.

To address this, a new addon was written to experiment on a new test waiter system that would provide a number of things (as noted above):

1. A new API that's _explicit_ and _straightforward_
1. A more robust way to gather debugging information for the test waiter
1. Default test waiters with the ability to author your own, more complex test waiters

> This would allow developers to utilize this new test waiters system to annotate their asynchronous operations not tracked by the settled check, and for those annotations to provide useful debugging information in the event their async extended past the expected duration of the test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows developers to utilize `ember-test-waiters` to annotate their asynchronous operations that are not tracked by an `await settled()` check, and for those annotations to provide useful debugging information in the event their async extended past the expected duration of the test.
```

## Comparison of old waiters system to new

In the old test waiters system, you would do the following:

```js
import { registerWaiter } from '@ember/test';

registerWaiter(function() {
  return myPendingTransactions() === 0;
});
```

While reading the above is straightforward, when writing a test waiter using the old system it's easy to forget what the expected return value is: `true` or `false`. Additionally, it's a bit more cognitive overhead to derive what the intended result of the particular boolean return value is: does returning `true` result in the test waiter waiting or not?

> As mentioned before, there's no additional information provided via `registerWaiter`, and no way to capture stack traces at the call site.

Reviewer: Maybe flesh this out a tad bit more. Specifically, I'd like to see a bit of prose that explains that when some async that is being waited on your test is "hung" (and may time out) but it is not possible for you to identify which of the (possibly hundreds!) waiters in your application was "stuck".

    someAsyncWork()
      .then(() => {
        //... some work
      })
      .finally(() => {
        waiter.endAsync(token);
      });
  }
}
```

In the above example, a new test waiter is built that is identified via a `name` string passed into the `buildWaiter` function. This allows the waiter to be identifiable, and that name is ultimately used with test isolation validation to help developers narrow down problems in their tests.

The API used to signal whether an asynchronous operation has begun and ultimately ended is through the paired calls of `beginAsync` and `endAsync`: begin to denote the start of the asynchronous operation, and end to denote the end. Unique instances of async operations are identified using a `token` returned from `beginAsync`, which is subsequently provided to the `endAsync` call.

This new test waiters system has been through multiple iterations of refinement, and is in use and integrated with the test isolation validation system. Furthermore, it is backwards compatible with the old test waiters system, allowing applications and addons to gradually migrate to using the new system.

## Deprecating the old test waiters

> The old test waiters system will be deprecated in its own deprecation RFC.

Reviewer: Let's tweak this to be an overall "compatibility" section with:

* registerWaiter continues to work, and is not deprecated
* addons using ember-test-waiters work even if consumed in applications that do *not* use a new enough ember-test-helpers version (they don't get the nice new fancy helpful output, but it still works)

# How We Teach This

> This new test waiters system should be included in the Ember guide's testing section. Information and examples should be provided to allow users to correctly author asynchronous code that can be correctly managed by the testing system.

Reviewer: Can you link to a few of the existing guide pages that will be rewritten?

Author: I don't think any particular page should be rewritten. I think a new section should be added to https://guides.emberjs.com/release/testing/, which clearly defines what a test waiter is, and how and when to use them.

# Drawbacks

> - added work to integrate the new test waiters system with `ember-mocha`

Reviewer: IMHO, this isn't a drawback, it's should be part of the detailed design.

Author: Ya I agree, and wasn't sure where to put this, so decided to be a bit snarky and put it here :)

I'll update this and call it out in the detailed design section.

Author: In fact, now that I think about it this should already work with `ember-mocha`, since we're merely depending on the integration with the `settled` check in `@ember/test-helpers`.

- the new test waiters system ships code to production bundles, though this is quite small

# Alternatives

> - the existing test waiters system could be left in place

Reviewer: 😡

Author: 😃

1. A new API that's _explicit_ and _straightforward_
1. A more robust way to gather debugging information for the test waiter
1. Default test waiters with the ability to author your own, more complex test waiters

This allows developers to utilize `ember-test-waiters` to annotate their asynchronous operations that are not tracked by an `await settled()` check, and for those annotations to provide useful debugging information in the event their async extended past the expected duration of the test.

## Comparison of old waiters system to new

In the old test waiters system, you would do the following:

```js
import { registerWaiter } from '@ember/test';

registerWaiter(function() {
  return myPendingTransactions() === 0;
});
```

While reading the above is straightforward, when writing a test waiter using the old system it's easy to forget what the expected return value is: `true` or `false`. Additionally, it's a bit more cognitive overhead to derive what the intended result of the particular boolean return value is: does returning `true` result in the test waiter waiting or not?

> As mentioned before, there's no additional information provided via `registerWaiter`, and no way to capture stack traces at the call site. Unmanaged async that 'hangs' can cause your tests to stall and ultimately timeout. This is particularly problematic when trying to identify which of many test waiters has caused this timeout.

Reviewer 2: How do you capture stack traces in the new test waiters design?

Reviewer: @Gaurav0 - When `.beginAsync` is called on a test waiter we capture the stack trace (in debug builds) and save it off.

Author: I added a brief description of how we do it.

To annotate the example provided above:

```js
import Component from '@ember/component';
import { buildWaiter } from 'ember-test-waiters';

// Creates a test waiter with the name 'friend-waiter' that
// is usable by all instances of the `Friendz` component.
let waiter = buildWaiter('friend-waiter');

export default class Friendz extends Component {
  didInsertElement() {
    // Alerts the test waiter system that an async operation has started,
    // storing the resulting unique token to be used to notify the test
    // waiter system that the operation has ended.
    let token = waiter.beginAsync();

    someAsyncWork()
      .then(() => {
        //... some work
      })
      .finally(() => {
        // Notifies the test waiter system that
        // this unique async operation has ended.
        waiter.endAsync(token);
      });
  }
}
```

### `waitForPromise`

> The `waitForPromise` utility provides a convenience wrapper around the `TestWaiter` class for use with promises. It ensures the `endAsync` call is invoked in the `finally` of the configured promise.

Reviewer 2: Can you add an example of how to use `waitForPromise`?

Author: Most definitely.

Reviewer: Ya, good idea

import { waitForPromise } from 'ember-test-waiters';

export default class MoreFriendz extends Component {
  didInsertElement() {
    waitForPromise(someAsyncWork).then(() => {
      doOtherThings();
    });
  }
}
```

This new test waiters system has been through multiple iterations of refinement, and is in use and integrated with the test isolation validation system.

## Rename of `ember-test-waiters` to `@ember/test-waiters`

We should consider renaming the `ember-test-waiters` repository to `@ember/test-waiters`, which would relocate it to the Ember org and scope it more explicitly.

## Compatibility

The `ember-test-waiters` addon is backwards compatible with the old test waiters system, allowing applications and addons to gradually migrate to using the new system.

Specifically:

- `registerWaiter` continues to work, and is not deprecated
- addons using `ember-test-waiters` work _even if consumed in applications that do not use a new enough `ember-test-helpers` version_ (they won't get additional output via test isolation validation such as test waiter names or stack traces)

The old test waiters system ultimately should be deprecated in its own deprecation RFC.

> # How We Teach This

Reviewer 3: I think the "How we teach this" should include guidance for how we communicate to addon developers vs. app developers.

For example we need to communicate to addon developers that they should expose waited async and avoid passing the burden of using the wrappers to the end user.

Author: This is a great callout. I've added a specific section that indicates that addon authors should have further direction on the importance of adding test waiters to their addon's unmanaged async.

> 

Reviewer 4: I think we should add some more details about where the API docs themselves will live. Will they be in the addon README or would they be included in the api.emberjs.com docs?

Reviewer 4: I would also like to see some bullet points on what information should go in cli.emberjs.com as advice for addon authors. cc @mixonic

Author: For sure. Added a callout that API docs will be available there.

  endAsync(token: T): void;
  reset(): void;
}
```

- `beginAsync`: Should be used to signal the beginning of an async operation that
is to be waited for. Invocation of this method should be paired with a subsequent
`endAsync` call to indicate to the waiter system that the async operation is completed.
- `endAsync`: Should be used to signal the end of an async operation. Invocation of this
method should be paired with a preceding `beginAsync` call, which would indicate the
beginning of an async operation.
- `reset`: Resets the waiter state, clearing items tracking async operations in this waiter.

This interface is used for the concrete `TestWaiter` type. This type forms the basis for the addon, and will likely satisfy the majority of use cases.

The most common practice is to import and invoke the `buildWaiter` function to create a new test waiter. The recommendation is to do so at the module level, which allows a single waiter to be created per type (this should likely be enforced via a lint rule added to `eslint-plugin-ember`). A single waiter is then usable across multiple instances.

```ts
function buildWaiter(name: string): ITestWaiter
```

> In anything but a production build, this function will return a `TestWaiter` instance. When in production mode, we make this instance _inert_ and essentially no cost to invoke. Since test waiters are intended to be called from application or addon code, but are only required to be _active_ when in tests, this process of making the instance _inert_ is important. Even though code is still invoked, this has a negligible impact on performance.

Reviewer 3: How do we feel about the plausibility of a system which would make this configurable. Basically users who want to optimize for test-ability of production builds can leave the inert code, and users who want to optimize for every byte can strip the inert code out?

Or is this already designed in such a way that it would be trivial to author an addon which stripped the inert code from production builds, allowing byte-watchers to opt-in to that size optimization? (I think it would be easy, but I'd like to hear from the authors)

Reviewer: I think there are two parts to this:

1. ensuring that the addon's code itself is not shipped outside of testing
2. authoring a babel plugin that allows the statements in app and addon code to be removed

Both are doable and should be investigated during implementation (though I don't think it's particularly important to happen _before_ we land the RFC).

Author: These are good callouts, @mixonic. Early on @rwjblue and I discussed the possibility of stripping code from prod builds that weren't destined to be tested. I think as Rob describes above, we could absolutely do this. 

We also need to add a separate flag other than `DEBUG`, such as `FOR_TESTING` (don't worry about the name; naming is hard yada yada), but that will allow us to do prod builds that will allow for testing. Obviously this is a broader change that impacts a number of things, but is something we've also discussed.

There are a few concepts that we should focus on:

1. What patterns of asynchronous code can lead to issues in testing
1. How to utilize test waiters to address those asynchronous patterns
1. How to leverage the built-in test waiters utilities

## New Testing Section in Ember CLI Guides - "Handling Async (for Addon Authors)"

The important requirement that addon authors need to know about is that when using `ember-test-waiters`, that package should be added as a `dependency`.

Specifically for addon authors, we want to encourage the use of test waiters to prevent async leaks in tests due to unmanaged async. A special section directed at addon authors should be added to help them understand the value to their consumers by adding test waiters, or providing test helpers via `addon-test-support` integrated with test waiters.

# Drawbacks

- the new test waiters system ships code to production bundles, though this is quite small

# Alternatives

- the existing test waiters system could be left in place

# Unresolved questions

> - what is the correct order of operations to roll a change like this out?

Reviewer 3: Before merge please remove this line. Under detailed design you can add a section "rollout" which makes clear the proposal is:

* rename the addon
* add it to the default ember-cli blueprint
* there is no schedule for deprecating the old waiters, requires a new RFC

If that is correct this comment is simply an organizational, doesn't require FCP restart.

Author: Will do.

Author: Done.

While reading the above is straightforward, when writing a test waiter using the old system it's easy to forget what the expected return value is: `true` or `false`. Additionally, it's a bit more cognitive overhead to derive what the intended result of the particular boolean return value is: does returning `true` result in the test waiter waiting or not?

> As mentioned before, there's no additional information provided via `registerWaiter`, and capturing stack traces at the call site is currently not implemented. Unmanaged async that 'hangs' can cause your tests to stall and ultimately timeout. Not having stack traces is particularly problematic when trying to identify which of many test waiters has caused this timeout, as it's like looking for a needle in a haystack. The new system captures the stacks lazily, when the waiter's `beginAsync` method is called (more on `beginAsync` later). This allows for identifying the offending code more easily.

Reviewer: > The new system captures the stacks lazily, when the waiter's `beginAsync` method is called (more on `beginAsync` later).

I think this phrasing is _slightly_ confusing. We eagerly create the error object, but only force the stack to be reified when it's asked for (e.g. via `getSettledState`). I'm not sure how to say this better than what you have here though. 🤔

Author: I also felt the same. I have an idea. Will update.

Author: Updated. Take a look and let me know what you think.

In the above example, a new test waiter is built that is identified via a `name` string passed into the `buildWaiter` function. This allows the waiter to be identifiable, and that name is ultimately used with test isolation validation to help developers narrow down problems in their tests.

## New Test Waiters Design

The new test waiters addon is built using low-level primitives that are complimented with some convenience utilities.

### `IWaiter`

At its core, the addon uses an `IWaiter` interface defined as follows:

```ts
export type WaiterName = string;
export type Token = unknown;

export interface IWaiter {
  name: WaiterName;
  waitUntil(): boolean;
  debugInfo(): ITestWaiterDebugInfo[];

> }

Reviewer: Can you expand this slightly to include some API docs for each of the methods? Specifically, I'd like to explain the semantics of `waitUntil` (as long as this function returns `true` the waiter will be considered "waiting") and `debugInfo` (this information will be available in the test harnesses `getSettledState()` result, and is printed to the console when a test or a `waitFor`/`waitUntil` times out)

Author: Expanded!

```

This allows for maximum flexibility when creating your own waiter implementations.

### `ITestWaiter`

The `IWaiter` interface is built upon to create a more specific interface for a test waiter, `ITestWaiter`:

```ts
export interface ITestWaiter<T = Token> extends IWaiter {
  beginAsync(token?: T, label?: string): T;
  endAsync(token: T): void;
  reset(): void;
}
```

> This interface is used for the two internal concrete types: `TestWaiter` and `NoopTestWaiter`. These types for the basis for the addon, and will likely satisfy the majority of use cases.

Reviewer: > These types for the basis

This confuses me a bit, maybe you meant:

```
These types form the basis
```

Author: Ya that's a typo.

> The most common practice is to import and invoke the `buildWaiter` function to create a new test waiter. The recommendation is to do so at the module level, which allows a single waiter to be created per type. A single waiter is then usable across multiple instances.

Reviewer: We should propose an additional rule for eslint-plugin-ember to enforce the module scope-ness here

Author: Done!

```ts
function buildWaiter(name: string): ITestWaiter
```

> In anything but a production build, this function will return a `TestWaiter` instance. When in production mode, a `NoopTestWaiter` will be returned, which as the name suggests is effectively a noop class. Since test waiters are intended to be called from application or addon code, but are only required to be _active_ when in tests, we use the `NoopTestWaiter` to noop the class' methods when run in production. This has a negligible impact on performance.

Reviewer: I think we can avoid mentioning NoopTestWaiter specifically, but instead mention that in production (not testing) builds that the `TestWaiter` class is "inert" and optimized for "speed".

Author: I see no harm in mentioning it, just so people understand how it works slightly more than hand waving. Any issues with my leaving it in?

Reviewer: The issue is that the _how_ we make it inert is not really important (and definitely isn't public api). I think making it clear what our commitment is (that it is effectively zero cost in production), and that "for example, you could imagine that we use an alternative class implementation in production that makes all operations a no op".

Author: Sure. I can go either way, so will remove it.

## Rename of `ember-test-waiters` to `@ember/test-waiters`

We should consider renaming the `ember-test-waiters` repository to `@ember/test-waiters`, which would relocate it to the Ember org and scope it more explicitly.

## Compatibility

The `ember-test-waiters` addon is backwards compatible with the old test waiters system, allowing applications and addons to gradually migrate to using the new system.

Specifically:

- `registerWaiter` continues to work, and is not deprecated
- addons using `ember-test-waiters` work _even if consumed in applications that do not use a new enough `ember-test-helpers` version_ (they won't get additional output via test isolation validation such as test waiter names or stack traces)

The old test waiters system ultimately should be deprecated in its own deprecation RFC.

# How We Teach This

This new test waiters system should be included in the Ember guide's testing section. Information and examples should be provided to allow users to correctly author asynchronous code that can be correctly managed by the testing system.

> Specifically, calling this out in a separate section will allow readers to

Reviewer: Seems like this is cut off?

Author: Correct. I left the rest in my brain. Fixed now.

}
```

- `name`: The name of the test waiter, which is used to help identify it in test isolation validation output.
- `waitUntil`: Used to determine if the waiter system should still wait for async
operations to complete. The `waitUntil` method will return `true` to signal completion.

> - `debugInfo`: Returns the `debugInfo` for each item tracking async operations in a waiter. The `debugInfo` for each waiter item is ultimately used in `@ember/test-helpers`' `getSettledState` function, which is ultimately used for test isolation validation output.

Reviewer: s/ultimately//

Author: Ultimately I'll remove it.
